3.0.0.Alpha5 blog post (#1653)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2023-03-08-quarkus-3-0-0-alpha5-released.adoc

---
layout: post
title: 'Quarkus 3.0.0.Alpha5 released - now with Hibernate 6, new Developer Console and more!'
date: 2023-02-18
tags: release
synopsis: 'This version is the second biggest update with major impact for Quarkus 3 - upgrading Hibernate 5 to Hibernate 6.'
author: maxandersen
---

We are in the process of getting Quarkus 3 ready - last we got our main branch to Jakarta EE 10 to let us getting more things integrated and tested faster.

The big one this time is the move from Hibernate 5 to Hibernate 6 - which *will* cause breakages thus please read the section below for details if you are Hibernate ORM or Hibernate Reactive user.

>   * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31235[Hibernate ORM 6] & Hibernate Reactive 2

Reviewer: Not sure the PRs would be very useful to application developers, especially such large PRs...

In any case, if you want those links, you could add the HR one:

```suggestion
  * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31235[Hibernate ORM 6] & https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31454[Hibernate Reactive 2]
```

  * @Inject for https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31392[Hibernate StatelessSession]
  * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31175[Multiple Persistence Unit] support for Spring Data repositories
  * New Developer Console
  * `quarkus deploy` in Quarkus CLI
  * `@Scheduled` https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31343[support for timezones]
  * Support https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31192[HTTP/2 connections] in REST Client Reactive
  * `@ClientRedirectHandler` https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31142[to support custom redirect in REST Client Reactive]
  * Add support for https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31159[Gradle 8]
  * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31079[Multiple OIDC code flows now allowed in same browser]
    
  
== Hibernate ORM 6

> Hibernate ORM 6 is a major upgrade to the main persistence layer of Quarkus. It brings a lot of improvements and new features, but also some breaking changes. We have done our best to make the migration as smooth as possible, but some changes are unavoidable. 

Reviewer: We're going to do more! Hopefully.

```suggestion
Hibernate ORM 6 is a major upgrade to the main persistence layer of Quarkus. It brings a lot of improvements and new features, but also some breaking changes. We will do our best to make the migration as smooth as possible, but some changes are unavoidable. 
```

> We've written https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] guide for Quarkus users to help you with the migration.

Reviewer: We're going to do more! Hopefully.

```suggestion
We've started a https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] guide for Quarkus users to help you with the migration.
```

> Take particular note of the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration#database-orm-compatibility["Best-effort Hibernate ORM 5.6 compatability switch"] which reduces the impact of the default schema changes in Hibernate 6.

Reviewer: Maybe let's be clear that this switch is not intended for long-term use?

```suggestion
Take particular note of the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration#database-orm-compatibility["Best-effort Hibernate ORM 5.6 compatability switch"] which can temporarilly reduce the impact of the default schema changes in Hibernate 6 and give you more time to migrate.
```

Author: slightly reduced it t not make it a too complex sentence to parse :)

TBD: MTA command

> We want to improve and simplify these migration steps in preparation for Quarkus 3 thus do please report migration issues you encounter so we can improve the migration documentation and scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to improve and simplify these migration steps in preparation for Quarkus 3 thus do please https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/new/choose[report] migration issues you encounter so we can improve the migration documentation and scripts.
```

---
layout: post

> title: 'Quarkus 3.0.0.Alpha5 released - now with Hibernate 6, new Developer Console and more!'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: 'Quarkus 3.0.0.Alpha5 released - now with Hibernate ORM 6, new Dev UI and more!'
```

date: 2023-02-18
tags: release

> synopsis: 'This version is the second biggest update with major impact for Quarkus 3 - upgrading Hibernate 5 to Hibernate 6.'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
synopsis: 'This version is the second biggest update with major impact for Quarkus 3 - upgrading Hibernate ORM 5 to Hibernate ORM 6.'
```

author: maxandersen
---

:imagesdir: /assets/images/posts/3.0.0.alpha5
ifdef::env-github,env-browser,env-vscode[:imagesdir: ../assets/images/posts/3.0.0.alpha5]

We are in the process of getting Quarkus 3 ready - last we got our main branch to Jakarta EE 10 to let us getting more things integrated and tested faster. This time we move from Hibernate 5 to Hibernate 6 - which *will* cause breakages thus please read the section below for details if you are Hibernate ORM or Hibernate Reactive user.

And there is a new and improved Dev UI!

image::newdevui.png[]

The list of highlights for this release is:

  * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31235[Hibernate ORM 6] & https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31454[Hibernate Reactive 2]
  * @Inject for https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31392[Hibernate StatelessSession]
  * https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31175[Multiple Persistence Unit] support for Spring Data repositories

>   * New Developer Console

Author: yeah - my bad. Yes, Dev UI is what we should use :)

=== Inject Hibernate StatelessSession 
 
One of my favorite least-known features of Hibernate is the `StatelessSession` which is a lightweight session that does not track any state. It is perfect for batch processing and for those with a preference for a command oriented use-cases (insert,delete,update,...) over managed entities.

Before this release you had to manually configure it - with Quarkus 3 you can now simply inject a `StatelessSession`:

[source,java]
----
@Inject
StatelessSession statelessSession;
----

You can read more about `StatelessSession` in the https://docs.jboss.org/hibernate/orm/6.2/userguide/html_single/Hibernate_User_Guide.html#_statelesssession[Hibernate ORM guide].

== New Dev UI

Quarkus 2 introduced the Dev UI which provides a web ui to use during development. Extensions could provide their own Dev UI pages to provide additional functionality.

Quarkus 3 now has a new Dev UI which is more extensible and easier to use. It also has a new look and feel.

For now the new dev-ui is served at http://localhost:8080/q/dev-ui

> The old dev ui is still the default as not all extensions have migrated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The old Dev UI is still the default as not all extensions have migrated.
```

> We have a https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sz5ihmA4gaE&list=PLsM3ZE5tGAVbyncLm7ue2V25cwFck7ew9[playlist] on Quarkus YouTube channel that shows off the new Dev UI. Explains the new features and how to use and extend it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have a https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sz5ihmA4gaE&list=PLsM3ZE5tGAVbyncLm7ue2V25cwFck7ew9[playlist] on Quarkus YouTube channel that shows off the new Dev UI, explains the new features and how to use and extend it.
```

== `quarkus deploy` in all dev tools

Quarkus CLI and the Maven and Gradle plugins now have the ability to `deploy`.

[source,bash]
----
quarkus deploy
mvn quarkus:deploy
gradle deploy
----

> This enables the deployment of Quarkus application to platforms like Kubernetes, knative and Openshfit. All without requiring changes to the project dependencies or configuration and therefore simplfying developer experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enables the deployment of Quarkus applications to platforms like Kubernetes, Knative and OpenShift. All without requiring changes to the project dependencies or configuration and therefore simplifying developer experience.
```

We have started a https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration[Hibernate ORM 5 to 6 migration] guide for Quarkus users to help you with the migration.

Take particular note of the https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/wiki/Migration-Guide-3.0:-Hibernate-ORM-5-to-6-migration#database-orm-compatibility["Best-effort Hibernate ORM 5.6 compatability switch"] which can reduce the impact of the default schema changes in Hibernate 6 and give you more time to migrate.

TBD: MTA command

We want to improve and simplify these migration steps in preparation for Quarkus 3 thus do please https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/new/choose[report] migration issues you encounter so we can improve the migration documentation and scripts.

=== Hibernate Reactive Temporarily Disabled

An early alpha version of Hibernate Reactive 2 is under active development and unfortunately not ready for use.

> In name of getting early feedback on all other parts of Quarkus we have excluded Hibernate Reactive from the Alpha5 relese. We are working hard on re-enabling it for an upcoming future release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In name of getting early feedback on all other parts of Quarkus we have excluded Hibernate Reactive from the Alpha5 release. We are working hard on re-enabling it for an upcoming future release.
```
